docs: add Documentation Maintainer community role (#1038)
gardener/documentation: hugo/content/contribute/contribution-process/documentation-roles.md

---
aliases:
  - /docs/contribute/code/documentation-roles/
github_repo: 'https://github.com/gardener/documentation'
github_subdir: hugo/content/contribute/contribution-process
params:
  github_branch: master
path_base_for_github_subdir:
  from: content/contribute/contribution-process/documentation-roles.md
  to: documentation-roles.md
title: "Documentation Roles"
outline: 2
weight: 40
prev: false
next: false
local: true
---

# Documentation Roles

This document describes documentation-specific contribution roles within the Gardener community.
The [general community roles](/contribute/contribution-process/roles/) are tailored to code repositories. Documentation roles have their own requirements and responsibilities because maintaining the aggregated documentation across the different repositories requires editorial and structural expertise.

> ## Documentation Members
> 
> Documentation members are the same as Gardener community members .
> To learn more about the general membership requirements and responsibilities, please refer to the [members section](/contribute/contribution-process/roles/#member).

Reviewer: Hopefully, final _nit_ from my end, I think this section can be dropped since it doesn't add any additional info, right?
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: It does add new info ;) It lets new documentation contributors know that they can be members, too. Without it, the document reads as though contributors can only be reviewers or approvers.

## Documentation Reviewer

Documentation reviewers are responsible for assessing the quality, clarity, and structural correctness of documentation contributions.

> They are granted the privilege to `/lgtm` pull requests on the [documentation repository](https://github.com/gardener/documentation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They are granted the privilege to use the `/lgtm` comment on pull requests in the [documentation repository](https://github.com/gardener/documentation).
```

---
aliases:
  - /docs/contribute/code/documentation-roles/
github_repo: 'https://github.com/gardener/documentation'
github_subdir: hugo/content/contribute/contribution-process
outline: 2
params:
  github_branch: master
path_base_for_github_subdir:
  from: content/contribute/contribution-process/documentation-roles.md
  to: documentation-roles.md
title: "Documentation Roles"
weight: 40
prev: false
next: false
local: true
---

# Documentation Roles

This document describes documentation-specific contribution roles within the Gardener community.

> The [general community roles](/contribute/contribution-process/roles/) are tailored to code repositories; documentation roles have their own requirements and responsibilities, because maintaining the aggregated documentation across the different repositories requires editorial and structural expertise.

Reviewer 2: The title and introduction give off the impression that you are defining new roles, i.e. the roles of documentation reviewers and documentation approvers. However, I thought we agreed that we will NOT introduce any documentation-specific roles. What is documentation-specific are some of the requirements and responsibilities. The roles remain the same across the Gardener community – members, reviewers, and approvers. Or did I misunderstand the previous comments?

> The [general community roles](/contribute/contribution-process/roles/) are tailored to code repositories; documentation roles have their own requirements and responsibilities, because maintaining the aggregated documentation across the different repositories requires editorial and structural expertise.

Reviewer 2: There are a lot of semicolons throughout the file. A simple period would be a better choice ;)

```suggestion
The [general community roles](/contribute/contribution-process/roles/) are tailored to code repositories. Documentation roles have their own requirements and responsibilities because maintaining the aggregated documentation across the different repositories requires editorial and structural expertise.
```

> > [!Note]

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
```

> > Documentation roles are defined in the [`OWNERS_ALIASES`](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/blob/master/OWNERS_ALIASES) file of the [documentation repository](https://github.com/gardener/documentation).

Reviewer: Not exactly sure what this is trying to express. Is it trying to say the same as the sentence further below?
> Contributors with this role are technically defined in the [`OWNERS_ALIASES`](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/blob/master/OWNERS_ALIASES) file of the documentation repository.

I'm not sure if we need the callout at all

> ## Documentation Reviewer

Reviewer 2: Why did you leave out the members? Documentation contributors can be members, can't they? If you skipped the role because its requirements and responsibilities are the same as the ones described in [Community Roles](https://gardener.cloud/contribute/contribution-process/roles/), then just mention that and refer readers to the other document.

Documentation reviewers are responsible for assessing the quality, clarity, and structural correctness of documentation contributions.
They are granted the privilege to `/lgtm` pull requests on the [documentation repository](https://github.com/gardener/documentation).

> Contributors with this role are technically defined in the [`OWNERS_ALIASES`](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/blob/master/OWNERS_ALIASES) file of the documentation repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reviewers are technically defined in the [`OWNERS_ALIASES`](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/blob/master/OWNERS_ALIASES) file of the documentation repository.
```

> Unlike [reviewers](/contribute/contribution-process/roles/#reviewer), documentation reviewers do not require professional expertise in a specific Gardener topic area, but should have a solid understanding of the documentation structure and editorial conventions.

Reviewer: Do we need the reference to the community roles? I almost feel like it adds more confusion. If we keep it, I'd slightly rewrite the link to make it clearer that we're linking to a role on a different page.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @marc1404. I don't think you need to point out the differences in requirements.

**Requirements**
- Member of the Gardener org

> - Solid understanding of the Gardener documentation structure and the docforge aggregation process

Reviewer 2: Isn't the name of the tool "Docforge" (with a capital "D")? [The README in gardener/docforge](https://github.com/gardener/docforge/blob/master/README.md) almost always refers to it as "Docforge".

> - Familiarity with the documentation tooling, i.e., [docforge](https://github.com/gardener/docforge) aggregation, the [VitePress](https://vitepress.dev/) site generator, Markdown, and the local build, post-processing, and preview workflow

Reviewer: nit: "docforge aggregation process" is repeated between the two bullets

- Enabled GitHub notifications for PR invites and documentation issues

**Responsibilities**
- Regular contributions in the form of pull requests, reviews, and issues for the documentation
- Tracking of open documentation pull requests and issues
- Responsiveness, especially during documentation reviews and discussions

**How to become a documentation reviewer**

> - Demonstrate the requirements through previous contributions (documentation changes, PR review participation, issue discussions)

Reviewer 2: The other bullet points under this subsection end with a period (I assume that's because they are imperative sentences and not sentence fragments like the bullet points in other subsections).

```suggestion
- Demonstrate the requirements through previous contributions (documentation changes, PR review participation, issue discussions).
```

- Obtain sponsorship from at least two approvers of the [documentation repository](https://github.com/gardener/documentation).

> - Open a [membership request](https://github.com/gardener/org/issues/new?template=membership_role.yaml); if accepted, an approver creates a PR to update [`OWNERS_ALIASES`](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/blob/master/OWNERS_ALIASES) of the documentation repository.

Reviewer: Is this last line still valid like this? The first link points to the general Gardener membership issue template

> - Open a [membership request](https://github.com/gardener/org/issues/new?template=membership_role.yaml); if accepted, an approver creates a PR to update [`OWNERS_ALIASES`](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/blob/master/OWNERS_ALIASES) of the documentation repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Open a [membership request](https://github.com/gardener/org/issues/new?template=membership_role.yaml). If accepted, an approver creates a PR to update [`OWNERS_ALIASES`](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/blob/master/OWNERS_ALIASES) of the documentation repository.
```

## Documentation Approver

Documentation approvers are deeply involved in the holistic maintenance, structure, and operation of the [Gardener documentation](https://gardener.cloud/).
In addition to approver permissions on the [documentation repository](https://github.com/gardener/documentation), they hold approver permissions for the `/docs` folder of every project referenced in the [docforge manifest files](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/tree/master/.docforge), which [docforge](https://github.com/gardener/docforge) aggregates into the final documentation.
This cross-repository permission ensures smooth documentation maintenance, comparable to setups where all documentation lives in one central repository rather than being colocated with the code.

> They are granted the privilege to `/approve` pull requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They are granted the privilege to approve pull requests by using the `/approve` comment.
```

> Unlike [approvers](/contribute/contribution-process/roles/#approver), documentation approvers do not require deep technical expertise across the various components, but should still have a solid understanding of Gardener.

Reviewer: Similar comment as above for "reviewers", I feel like this line just adds confusion i.e. I wouldn't necessarily link to the general approvers role

Documentation approvers share the requirements and responsibilities of [documentation reviewers](#documentation-reviewer), with additional expectations:

**Requirements**
- Deep understanding of the Gardener documentation lifecycle
- Sustained contributions to the documentation, e.g., improving structure, wording, and presentation

**Responsibilities**
- Maintain the overall structure, presentation, and operation of the aggregated documentation
- Must limit changes in repositories other than the documentation repository to organizational or technical adjustments (fixing syntax, restructuring folders, adapting presentation, improving wording, etc.)
- Never alter the underlying meaning of content in other repositories without prior approval from an [approver](/contribute/contribution-process/roles/#approver) of that repository

**How to become a documentation approver**

> - Obtain sponsorship from a quorum of approvers of the [documentation repository](https://github.com/gardener/documentation); nomination is initiated by one or more existing documentation approvers through a new PR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Obtain sponsorship from a quorum of approvers of the [documentation repository](https://github.com/gardener/documentation). Nomination is initiated by one or more existing documentation approvers through a new PR.
```
